1
Professional Writing and Ethics
661.110.02
Fall 2026
Tuesdays and Thursdays 10:30-11:45am
Croft Hall G02
Dr. Cara Dickason
cara.dickason@jhu.edu
Office: Wyman Park Building W419
Office Hours: Tuesdays 3-4pm and by appointment
Course Assistant:
Ayush Doshi
adoshi5@jh.edu
N115 Wyman Park Building or online
Office Hours: Wednesday TBD
Course Description
Many professionals in STEM fields may not consider themselves writers, but in fact, effective
communication and flexibility as a writer will serve you well in every professional setting you
will inhabit. This course teaches students to write skillfully, think ethically, and communicate
persuasively by responding to ethical challenges that arise between technology and society in the
twenty-first century. Topics for this course are drawn from the WSE’s Grand Challenges and
other ethical contexts relevant to engineering, including contemporary debates about the social,
economic, and environmental responsibilities of professional engineers. Course activities are
designed to hone students’ ability to write effectively as individuals and in teams, think critically
about complex topics, evaluate and integrate evidence to support their ideas, communicate
effectively with professional and public stakeholders, create effective visuals and infographics,
and develop adaptability with new genres.
This course will emphasize writing as a process, rather than a product, and consistent
opportunities to revise will play a key part in that process. Specifically, we will consider writing
as a process of communication, and we will be writing and communicating with each other this
semester. Our course will be a writing workshop. You will read and write a lot, share your
writing frequently, and respond to each other’s writing. We will all be collaborating to help each
other say what we want to say in the most effective way possible. This format for a class calls on
all of us to be generous and vulnerable, as writing is always personal, even when it is
professional.
2
The specific topic for this course is data privacy and surveillance. As we share more and more
data online, AI technology is adopted across industries, and algorithms increasingly determine
our sense of reality, the stakes of data surveillance are continuously rising. We will examine
some contemporary issues around data—including AI and intellectual property, targeted
algorithms, data bias, and government access to personal data—and consider the ethical
ramifications of whom our data does (or should) belong to, and where ethical responsibility may
ultimately lie. Through the assignments for this course, you will research a specific challenge in
data privacy and surveillance, propose an ethical position or solution related to that topic,
translate that solution to a concrete policy proposal, and present your position to a public
audience in a multi-modal format.
Course Objectives
These course objectives are focused on the skills I hope you take with you into other courses and
your life outside of school.
By thoughtfully engaging in this course, you will develop your ability to:
• Write clear, concise, and audience-sensitive documents appropriate for professional and
technical settings.
• Respond to the needs of diverse professional audiences, especially decision-makers.
• Identify the main message, craft an appropriate narrative or “story,” and determine the most
effective genre/medium to use for any given situation.
• Support ideas with appropriate evidence.
• Quote, paraphrase, and cite in an appropriate style.
• Learn how to identify, work with and write for specific audiences, important stakeholders, and
subject-matter experts.
• Edit and revise written work strategically and effectively.
• Deliver and respond to feedback effectively.
• Experience the different dynamics of writing individually versus collaboratively.
• Collaborate effectively in team-based communication projects.
• Build self-awareness through reflection on personal strengths/weaknesses as a communicator.
• Articulate problems with complex ethical dimensions, dispassionately expressing the
competing perspectives and interests of diverse stakeholders.
ABET Accreditation Outcomes
In fulfilling various ABET requirements, this course helps students develop an ability to:
● identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of
engineering, science, and mathematics
3
● apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with
consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, cultural, social,
environmental, and economic factors
● communicate effectively with a range of audiences
● recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and make
informed judgments, which must consider the impact of engineering solutions in global,
economic, environmental, and societal contexts
● function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create a
collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives
● develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, and use
engineering judgment to draw conclusions.
● acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies.
Textbooks
1. Engineering Ethics by Deborah Johnson
2. They Say/I Say by Cathy Birkenstein and Gerald Graff
3. Writing Science in Plain English by Anne Greene
Assignments
Issue Brief (20%)
A research report detailing a problem, need, or issue related to data privacy and identifying
future possibilities to address the problem, aimed at professionals in your field. This assignment
will include an annotated bibliography with short summaries of five sources relevant to your
issue brief topic.
Issue Brief Presentation (5%)
Policy Brief (20%)
A collaborative research report proposing a specific policy-based solution to a problem related to
data privacy aimed at lawmakers. This assignment will also include a group memo laying out
your plan for collaborative writing.
Multi-modal Project (15%)
A project incorporating multiple media that conveys an important idea about data privacy to a
public audience.
Final Reflection (5%)
A final reflection on the semester’s work and your development as a writer, communicator, and
ethical thinker.
4
Other Assignments
Participation, Attitude, and Improvement (15%)
This will be a dynamic, highly interactive course that centers your voices, both in writing and out
loud. Its success depends on our commitment to being active, thoughtful community members.
You are expected to engage respectfully and generously with everyone in the class. Attendance
and tardiness also factor into this grade. If you have questions about the best ways for you to
participate in class, please let me know.
Reading Reflections (10%)
Throughout the semester, I will ask you to turn in reflections on some of our readings. Some of
these will be written at home before class and others written in class. I recommend coming to
class with all readings annotated so that you have a few questions, quotes, or main ideas ready to
share.
Peer Feedback (10%)
For each unit of the course, you will share writing with your peer workshop group and respond to
their writing. We will discuss the details of that process later, but you will be expected to engage
thoughtfully, respectfully, and generously with the work of your peers (as usual!). I am not
asking you to be a judge or an editor, but to be an active reader.
Grading & Grade Scale
A note about grades: I hope that you put energy and thoughtfulness into the course because that
is the way for all of us to get something out of it. I provide feedback on assignments with the
goal of helping you develop your voice and skill as a writer, and I hope you will prioritize that
growth. The grades I assign to your work are a measure of how successfully you have completed
an assigned task, meant to give you guidance on how to continue to strengthen your skills as a
professional writer and communicator. They are not a measure of your potential as a student or
worth as a person, and the class is structured to value improvement rather than immediate
mastery. I do not assign grades based on need, but I am invested in your success and want to help
you improve. If you have questions about your grades after carefully considering my feedback,
visit me during office hours. I encourage you to speak with me early in the semester about what
your goals are for this course, including the final grade.
As per the CLE’s policies, I do not curve grades according to others’ performance, but I do hold
everyone to a high standard. In other words, this class is not an easy “A,” and you will be
5
expected to come to every class period and work diligently. Final scores are not rounded up. In
order to earn a grade, your scores must fall completely within the specified range.
A+ = 100%
A = 94-99%
A- = 90-93%
B+ = 87-89%
B = 83-86%
B- = 80-82%
C+ = 77-79%
C = 73-76%
C- = 70-72%
D+ = 67-69%
D = 63-66%
D- = 60-62%
F = 59%
Course Policies
Submitting Work
Work handed in at any time after the date and time stated on the syllabus schedule will be
penalized by 10% for each calendar day late. Extensions requested in advance are possible on a
case-by-case basis.
We will use Google Drive to submit and provide feedback on most assignments. Please speak to
me if you have any trouble accessing or navigating Drive.
Attendance
This course is designed as a workshop that promotes active learning. As a result, your attendance
and participation are key parts of your success in PWE.
Life sometimes presents obstacles to attending class. You are permitted two unexcused absences
without detriment to your grade. I do not need to know why you are missing these classes, nor do
you need to provide me with any kind of documentation, but please do let me and the TA know
as soon as possible if you know you will miss a class. You will still be responsible for any
written work or peer feedback due that day. If you are sick, have an emergency, or are
participating in religious observance, please speak with me as far ahead of time as possible, so
that we can plan how to cover the work. I strongly encourage you to find a classmate who can
share their notes for any missed classes. Absences beyond these circumstances will lower your
grade significantly, as will arriving late to class repeatedly. I count three (significantly) tardy
arrivals as an absence.
Communication Expectations
Email is the best way to reach me. I will respond to emails within 36 hours, though I may not
respond after 5pm, before 9am, or on the weekends. If you email me on a Friday, I will respond
by Monday, though I will try to respond sooner if it is a quick question with a short deadline (i.e.
an easy clarification about an assignment, can’t access a reading, etc.). If you have an urgent
issue, please put URGENT in the subject line and I will do my best to respond as soon as
6
possible. Please mention the course title and/or number in your email to me, especially if we are
in more than one class together. If you have an emergency, you can text or call me at
703-855-6367 (include your name please!).
Classroom Community
I am committed to creating a classroom community that values the diversity of perspectives that
all students bring. Please join me in creating a welcoming and vibrant classroom environment.
You can expect to be challenged intellectually by me, the TA, and your peers, which can
sometimes feel uncomfortable. While it can be helpful to be challenged in order to learn and
grow, at no time in this class should someone be treated unequally on the basis of any seen or
unseen part of their identity.
If you have concerns in this course about discrimination or unequal treatment, I invite you to
speak with me. I will take your communication seriously and seek acceptable resolutions. Such a
conversation will never impact your course grade. You may also report concerns to my
department chair Pam Sheff (psheff@jhu.edu), the Assistant Dean of Outreach and Belonging
Darlene Saporu (dsaporu@jhu.edu), or the Office of Institutional Equity (oie@jhu.edu).
As a member of the faculty, I am designated by the university as a "responsible employee,"
meaning that I am required to report any information pertaining to sexual harassment, assault,
stalking, or other sexual misconduct to the Title IX Coordinator.
Disability and Accessibility
I am committed to making this course useful and accessible to the widest possible range of
students. I will often need your help to make this commitment a reality. Please talk to me about
ways that I can structure the course to suit your own learning needs, whether or not you are
registered with Student Disability Services. If you need further accommodations that will be
forwarded to all of your instructors, Disability Services is a resource that may afford you certain
legally-protected accommodations. Make sure you submit this request as early as possible each
semester. Find more information here: https://studentaffairs.jhu.edu/disabilities/
Academic Honesty
I expect that students will approach all course assignments with honesty and a strong sense of
ethics. Please ask questions about how to avoid academic dishonesty. So long as you have not
submitted an assignment, we can respond together to individual situations.
To use another's work without responsible attribution can be considered plagiarism. I expect that
you will cite or verbally give attribution for any other person's ideas, images, diagrams, or other
relevant material that you use or otherwise draw inspiration from.
Instances of plagiarism, cheating, or academically-dishonest activity will likely result in a failing
grade for the assignment and, based upon severity, may result in an automatic "F" for the course.
7
The incident may also be reported to the JHU Ethics Board, which may result in a student being
expelled from the university. For this course, ethical violations include using others’ or
AI-generated work as your own, paraphrasing someone else's work, using previously-prepared
assignments, plagiarizing material, reusing other people's assignments, using the internet and
electronic devices in an improper way, collaborating in an unauthorized or deceitful way, altering
graded assignments, forging or falsifying sources, lying to the instructor or teaching assistant,
and facilitating academic dishonesty.
All students are required to complete MSE Library's "Avoiding Plagiarism" module in Canvas
during the first week of class. Instructions will be provided for completing this short and useful
review of academic honesty principles.
AI Policy: We will craft our AI policy together as a class.
Family Accommodations Policy
You are welcome to bring a family member to class on occasional days when your
responsibilities require it (for example, if emergency childcare is unavailable, or for the health
needs of a relative). Please be sensitive to the classroom environment, and if needed, you may
leave the classroom and return as needed.
Resources
Technical Communication Lab
The Technical Communication Lab provides free, confidential consultations for all JHU
undergraduate students and WSE graduate students. Housed in the Center for Leadership
Education in The Whiting School of Engineering, their consultants offer technical writing,
presentation practice, interview practice, and English as a Second Language (ESL) appointments.
You can find more information about the program and schedule an appointment through the
Technical Communication Lab website:
https://engineering.jhu.edu/cle/technical-communication-lab/
Health and Well-being
I encourage you to familiarize yourself with the services available at the Student Health and
Wellness Center, which include your primary care needs. College is challenging. If you are
struggling with anxiety, stress, depression, or other concerns, please consider contacting the JHU
Counseling Center. If you are concerned about a friend, please encourage them to seek out
mental health services as well. More information is available here:
https://wellbeing.jhu.edu/MentalHealthServices/
8
Student Outreach & Support helps students manage physical and mental health concerns,
personal and family emergencies, financial issues, and other obstacles that may arise during their
college experience. Students can self-refer or refer a friend who may need extra support or help
getting connected to resources. To connect with SOS, please visit their website, email
deanofstudents@jhu.edu, call 410-516-7857, or schedule to meet with a Case Manager by
visiting the website and filling out a referral form online.
Course Schedule
Week/Date Class Content Assignments/Readings Due
Week 1
Sep 1 & 3
Course Introduction Tues: Read syllabus and bring your questions
Thurs: Read Lamott, “Shitty First Drafts”
Week 2
Sep 8 & 10
Professional Writing and
Ethics
Surveillance and Privacy:
Who does your data belong
to?
Tues: Read Johnson, ch 3 “How Should
Engineers Think About Ethics?”
Nyholm, “Technology Ethics” excerpt
Thurs: Read Rohlinger, “Is Big Brother
Watching Us?”
Washington Post, “Police departments weren’t
looking for officers abusing Flock…”
Week 3
Sep 15 & 17
Surveillance and Privacy
cont’d
Introduction to the Issue
Brief - Framing a Problem
Tues: Listen to Rabbit Hole, Episodes 1-4 (On
Spotify, Apple Podcasts, etc.)
Read “A major AI training data set contains
millions of examples of personal data” (Guo)
& “The AI Copyright Battle” (Berger)
Thurs: “Big Tech’s Free Online Services
Aren’t Costing Consumers Their Privacy”
(Houalla, ITIF)
&
“Bespoke Pricing: What is the Invisible Hand
Up To?” (Slover, CDT)
Week 4 Researching Your Subject Tues: Read Birkenstein & Graff, “They Say:
9
Sep 22 & 24
Summarizing Research
Starting With What Others Are Saying”
Bring in one scholarly source annotation
Thurs:
Read Birkenstein & Graff, “Her Point Is: The
Art of Summarizing”
Bring in two more annotations
Week 5
Sep 29 & Oct 1
Working on the Issue Brief:
Synthesizing Research
Tues: Birkenstein & Graff, “As A Result:
Connecting the Parts”
Bring in min. 5 annotations and early work
on issue brief
Thurs: Greene, “Before You Write,” “Tell a
Story,” & “Design Your Paragraphs”
Issue Brief draft due Sunday 12pm
Week 6
Oct 6 & 8
Issue Brief Workshops
& Document Design
Tues: Peer feedback due at 10am
Thurs: Work on Issue Brief and Presentation
Revised Issue Brief Due Sunday 12pm
Week 7
Oct 13 & 15
Issue Brief Presentations Tues: Issue Brief Presentations
Thurs: Issue Brief Presentations
Week 8
Oct 20 & 22
Introduction to Writing
Policy Briefs
Fall Break Thursday
Tues: Read “Parents are desperate to protect
kids on social media. Why did the U.S. let a
safety bill die?” (Paul)
& “We Kill People Based on Metadata”
(Cole)
&
Policy Briefs writing resource
Week 9
Oct 27 & 29
Writing Policy Briefs
&
Collaborative Writing
Data visualizations
Tues: Read Schimel, “Making a Story Sticky”
Group Memo due end of class
Thurs: Browse the Storytelling with Data
Chart Guide
Read Storytelling with Data, “Shape Your
10
Story”
Week 10
Nov 3 & 5
Working on the Policy
Brief
Tues & Thurs: Work on Policy Brief
Policy Brief Draft due Sunday 12pm
Week 11
Nov 10 & 12
Introduction to
Multi-Modal Project
Tues: Peer feedback due at 10am
Thurs: Hard Fork podcast episode;
Reply all podcast episode, “Permanent
Record”
Revised Policy Brief due Sunday 10pm
Week 12
Nov 17 & 19
Working on Multi-modal
project
Tues & Thursday: Work on multi-modal
project. Proposal due Tuesday end of class
Week 13
Nov 24 & 26
Thanksgiving Break Project Draft due Sunday 12pm
Week 14
Dec 1 & 3
Multi-modal Project
Workshop
Tues: Peer feedback due at 10am
Thurs: Work on project
Revised Project due Sunday 10pm
Week 15
Dec 8 & 10
Present multi-modal
projects
Finals Week Final Reflection due during final exam
period